Okay, let's talk about movies.
This summer, the New York Times put out
a list of the top 100 movies of the 21st
century. It prompted furious debate
about what movies stand the test of
time, why they matter, and what those
movies tell us about ourselves. From the
New York Times, I'm Natalie Kitroof.
This is the daily.
Kyle, welcome to the show. It is really
wonderful to be talking to you about
movies at this time when the news has
just been like coming at us like a fire
hose every single day. Thank you for
this.
>> I'm happy to provide that relief.
>> You've been covering this industry for
what, two decades or something like
that, Kyle?
>> Yes. I started as a child prodigy, if
that's what you're getting at.
>> Exactly. Yeah. You you start at the ripe
the the age of five as we know.
>> Exactly.
>> Here you are 25 years old uh talking to
us here at the daily. Okay. We are here
to discuss something really ambitious
that you and your colleagues at the
culture desk did this summer which is
that you ranked the top 100 movies of
the 21st century. And this is coming at
a pretty interesting time for the
movies. Some might say it's not the best
moment for the movies, for the craft,
for the business. And yet you put out
this list and people kind of lost their
minds. Millions of people read it. It
was commented upon. It was there were
Tik Tok videos made about it. There was
a separate reader list that we will get
to. It was a thing is the point. It was
a massive thing and honestly very
encouraging for me as somebody who loves
movies to see just how strongly people
responded to this you know as you said I
think there's been some debate recently
over you know the art form of movies has
have movies lost their cultural
influence they used to feel so primary
when it came to art and I think this
poll this this reaction to it is kind of
a reputation of that it proves movies
still matter
>> and I One of the things that made this
list really special is how you actually
constructed it. You called these 500
filmmakers, actors, writers, directors,
and asked them to tell you what their
favorites were. And the Daily actually
called some of them and had some pretty
amazing conversations about it. So,
first of all, should I call you Steve? I
>> You can call me Steve. That's
>> okay.
>> Just don't call me late to dinner.
Well, my name is Steven King.
>> Hi, my name is Sleen Song. I'm Molly
Ringwald.
>> I am Gina Prince Bwood.
>> I'm Benny Safy.
>> Okay. How did you collect all of these
ballots?
>> Basically, we went to about 500 people
uh who work in the movie industry and
around it. And we asked them to submit
their ballots for what they thought were
the 10 best movies released since
January 1st, 2000. And we really went
after an eclectic group of people. We
have uh the director and the star of the
last best picture winner that'd be Shawn
Baker who made Anora and Mikey Madison
who starred in it. We have other movie
stars Julianne Moore, Tilda Swinton,
Chuell Edgia and an incredible array of
Oscar-winning directors like Pedro
Moadova, Sophia Copala, GMO Del Toro,
Core Jefferson. It's a really exciting
list and as those ballots came in, I
couldn't wait to see what they'd picked.
>> Anything that makes me want to choose it
because it's going to make me look cool,
I won't choose. you know, there's a part
of you that just like wants to like pick
the ones that nobody else picked. But I
didn't do that. I actually picked the
ones that I thought were really the
best.
>> And really, the most exciting thing for
me has been to see how many different
people interpret that prompt. The idea
of what are my 10 favorite movies or are
they 10 best or are they 10 most serious
or 10 funniest, you know, that can be
anything to you.
>> I'll start with Moonlight. and
moonlight.
Black boys look blue.
>> I just remember being
so still at the end of it. I didn't want
to move. Brokeback Mountain, I think,
was one that I remember just being
floored by in, you know, in the movie
theater.
>> So, what we got now is Brokeback
Mountain.
If I'm like channel surfing and one of
these movies comes up, I will stay and
watch it.
>> It was really at the end of the day a
guttural drive that that got me to that
10 films that really meant something to
me and changed my life.
>> In putting this ballot together, you're
telling a story about yourself. You
know, the ballot is indicating something
about your sensibility. Even more than
that, unconsciously, you're telling the
story of your last 25 years. you know,
the 25 years that you've experienced,
the movies that you've watched, the
things that really stick to you that you
maybe you saw 23 years ago, but you
can't stop thinking about them. That
says something about you. And I think
what's really been gripping about this
is that these ballots,
even more than just revealing something
about the state of the movie industry,
can reveal something about ourselves.
>> Okay. So, you've had time to analyze the
list. What do you see when you look at
this list?
>> There's movies that you wouldn't have
expected to make the list or make it as
highly as they did. And then there's
things that I thought were no-brainers
that were absolutely going to make the
100 that were left off totally. And also
in addition to that, a lot of revealing
themes that tell their own story of
where the film industry has gone over
the last 25 years.
>> Okay, obviously we're not going to be
able to go through all 100 movies, but I
am very excited to get into this. Let's
talk about a category you wouldn't have
expected to be on there.
>> Honestly, I didn't think we'd see as
many comedies as we saw. And I was
delighted to see that we saw them. There
are movies like Bridesmaids.
>> You know what? Why can't you just be
happy for me and then go home and talk
behind my back later like a normal
person?
>> Or my Kazakhstan
>> best in show.
>> We both have so much in common. We both
love soup.
>> Even anchor man. I'm Ron Burgundy.
>> Damn it. Who typed a question mark on
the teleprompter?
>> And I don't know that necessarily we
would have expected those because when
you give people a prompt like this,
maybe the assumption is they default to
prestige movies. You know, big Oscar
venerated classics. You know, comedies
at the Oscars often get short shrift.
And I was pleased to see that on our
list they were well represented. Even
somebody like Julianne Moore, who we
think of as the actress who would star
in the prestige drama, is picking movies
like The 40-year-old Virgin on her. I
saw that.
>> I loved that. You know, I loved the
idiosyncrasies that we all have if we're
being honest about what art we respond
to. And I really appreciated that people
were honest about those things.
>> I want to talk about Super Bad. It's the
first one you see when you kind of open
the list up. And I think that one is
kind of important because it's the one
where you say like, "Wow, I guess I'm
surprised to see that this movie is in
the top 100 of the 21st century and yet
it's a movie where I can remember
specific scenes from it." I really
connected with it. What do you make of
that one being on here?
>> I mean, I was surprised, too, but I
think it's part of the fun of the list.
You know, when people are thinking of
best movies, sometimes they're thinking
of movies they've only watched once.
Sometimes those movies are so harrowing
you'd only want to watch them once,
right?
>> And so you'd expect to be encountering
that when you open up this list. And
instead, number 100 is Superb Bad.
>> Mcloven,
>> what kind of a stupid name is that?
Fogle. What are you trying to be an
Irish R&B singer?
>> That is a film that honestly I think
once you see it on this list, it maybe
hopefully recontextualizes how you think
of this film. But ultimately, you know,
this is a movie that the fans of it have
watched countless times and honestly
minted a whole new generation of stars,
including Jonah Hill, Michael Sarah, and
Emma Stone, who, you know, this this is
a movie that's turbocharged her that was
one of the defining teen movies of its
generation, I would say, alongside Mean
Girls, which I wish had made the list,
deserved.
>> Huge snub. Okay, so what other patterns
did you notice here? I saw a lot of aur
filmmakers through this list. You know,
honestly, there's a handful of people
who made movies on this list that take
up a really outsized portion, almost a
quarter of the hundred.
>> Okay, so just define a filmmakers for
those of us who may not know exactly
what it means.
>> Yeah, an aur filmmaker is typically a
writer director. It's somebody who has
such a personal vision or a distinctive
style that, you know, you could
essentially call them the author of the
movie. And what are some movies? I
understand you're saying a lot of the
ones on the list are made by people like
that, but give me some examples of
movies that fit that bill.
>> Well, for example, you know, there's uh
there's four movies on this list that
are made by the Cohen brothers. Joel and
Ethan Cohen. You know, they've made No
Country for Old Men, Oh Brother, Where
Art Thou, Inside Luen Davis, A Serious
Man. They have these films that they're
shot a certain way. they tend to have,
you know, a similar bench of actors and
also there's just all these language uh
idiosyncrasies that you find in their
movies. Maybe even when they're playing
with genre, you're seeing, you know,
different themes and ideas keep cropping
up. I think that's the mark of a true
aur,
>> right? You you know when you're watching
a Cohen brothers film, right?
>> Yes. Just as you know when you're
watching something by David Lynch or
even Christopher Nolan, who has the most
movies on this list with five. And what
do you make of that Nolan's overwhelming
presence on this list?
>> I think it's, you know, it's it's a true
sign that if anybody could be regarded
as the Spielberg of this century, it's
Chris Nolan who manages to make studio
movies like The Dark Knight and
Inception that feel highbrow, that feel
like there's something to them and that
connect in a major way with audiences.
>> One movie I immediately noticed was
Mahulland Drive. It's number two on the
list. David Lynch film, an aur
filmmaker. I want to talk about that one
because while this movie is not my
favorite, just to just to get that out
there to admit that, I was so amazed and
really happy that it was so high on this
list in part because I felt like, wow,
this is a weird film and yet it
connected with so many people. Like so
many people out there loved this kind of
really strange dreamlike
piece of art.
It's not a movie that's for everybody,
but I can guarantee you that everybody
will have their own unique reaction to
that movie. I think that you could make
the case that Moholland Drive is too
highbrow. Um, you know, if people didn't
connect with it, that's probably uh the
pjorative that they would fling.
>> I I think I'm going to get that. I'm
already I'm my my editors are telling me
that um that I am lowbrow for not
getting it. So, I agree.
>> We're all allowed to be a little
lowbrow. And honestly, at the same time,
even if you don't like Mahalland Drive,
there's going to be images, vibes,
scenes, and ideas from it that stick
with you.
forever. You know, it's not a movie that
can be easily forgotten. I think that's
part of the reason it showed up on this
list. Even its haters were somewhat
transfixed by what that movie was
putting forward. And the people who
really love it, you know, it it's a it's
everything to them.
>> And we talked to the actor Eban Moss
Bakarak about this.
>> My name is Eban Moss Back. First of all,
Mahalland Drive, number two on the list.
I can't tell you. It was so so affirming
that this great artist, David Lynch, and
his unique renderings of the world and
and darkness and this sort of beguiling
dream logic that so many people
felt moved by this movie to to vote for
it. I mean, like number two, David, I
mean, I feel like he might he would be
shocked. What I like in a movie is not
knowing what's going to happen from one
moment to the next. I am more interested
in sitting in the theater with a bunch
of people and everyone having experience
and nobody knows where anything is going
to go. And certainly in Mahalland Drive
and all of David Lynch's work, you're
taken on a ride that like you you you
really don't know where you're going.
>> Man's attitude goes some ways the way
his life will be.
Is that something you might agree with?
>> Sure.
>> Okay, Kyle, let's hear the rest of the
top 10.
>> Yeah. Number 10 is The Social Network.
That's David Fincher's film about the
founding of Facebook. Uh number nine is
Spirited Away, which is the highest
placing animated movie on our list.
Number eight is Get Out. Uh number
seven, Eternal. So good, and I was
thrilled that it was in the top 10.
>> Uh number seven is Eternal Sunshine of
the Spotless Mind. Number six, No
Country for Old Men from Brothers.
>> Was that on your ballot, too?
>> Yes.
>> Um number five, Moonlight. Number four,
In the Mood for Love from Wong Car. Uh,
number three, There Will Be Blood from
the director Paul Thomas Anderson
starring Daniel Lewis. Incredible. Uh,
and number two was Mhalland Drive.
Number one was Parasite.
>> Okay, let's let's get into Parasite. I
want to know why you think I mean, you
were getting at this, but why you think
it is number one? What about that movie
resonated so widely?
>> Well, you know, Parasite was the first
movie not in English to win the best
picture Oscar. And I think the reasons
that it triumphed there have only become
more pronounced in the years since it
came out. You know, in addition to just
being a damn good movie, Parasite is
about pretty much all of the issues that
we're contending with on a daily basis
right now. in particular, that wealth
gap, that feeling that, you know, the
the boundary between classes is only
getting worse and we're only suffering
more and it's stripping away our
humanity. That's something that we felt
in 2019 when Parasite came out. That's
something we only feel more acutely
about now. It is a film that that felt
precient at the time. That speaks to our
current moment even better than it did
when it came out.
>> Totally. I mean, and when you think
about Parasite, a movie that is quite
literally about class war in the most uh
violent sense, it sort of feels like
it's not just capturing, you know,
inequities baked into Korean society.
It's telling us something about the
world. I mean, clearly because it's
number one for hundreds of people. You
know, honestly, in the specific, you
find the universal. And I think the
films that made the list, especially the
films that placed highly on this list,
are a good example of that. Yes,
Parasite is very specifically about this
section of South Korean society. But who
can't relate to that? You know, just
just as even, you know, some of the
stranger films on this list, there's
something that you feel, something you
respond to that tells you something
about your own life. Molly Ringwald and
I talked about Parasite and how the
movie made her feel.
I remember where I saw it and I remember
I was into Panga Canyon at the time. Um,
and I was watching it with my husband
and we and I really didn't know anything
about it.
There is that long sequence. They're
walking in the house in the, you know,
and the basement and I and I remember
like going down a hallway and then when
you discover this family living in the
house, I remember both my husband and I
were just what? Like, oh my god. Then
you're just completely focused. And
there's just not that many movies, I
think, that that do that on that level.
Kyle, we've talked about what is on the
list. I want to talk about what's not on
the list. Among the emissions that we at
the Daily noticed besides for Mean
Girls, which I mean, frankly,
>> for Mean Girls,
>> I I can't believe it. Um, is that there
aren't a lot of superhero movies. What
do you make of that?
>> There are two. Uh, we have Black Panther
and The Dark Knight on this list. I
think it's an indication that the movie
has to be really, really good to stand
the test of time. Especially, you know,
a lot of superhero storytelling, it's
meant to set up the next chapter, right?
Like these are essentially cliffhers.
They've got postredit scenes saying, "Go
to this movie, go to this movie." Maybe
at a certain point, it all starts to
blur together. So what are the truly
unique visions that come out of uh this
this you know corporate studiomandated
superhero storytelling? Is it even
possible to make a film that feels
especially unique when you're serving
all of those corporate mandates? You
know, it isn't easy to make an action
film that feels distinctive. There are
only a couple people who are even
capable of of of wielding the camera
like that. Uh, so when you see superhero
films made by Christopher Nolan and Ryan
Cougler, that those are the only two
movies that made this list, well, think
of the men who made those. You know,
those are true aours. Those are two of
the people who you'd be most excited to
see a new movie by. They're people with
a point of view.
>> The director, Gina Prince Bwood, talked
to us about Black Panther and how that
vision and the representation in that
movie influenced her.
Black Panther is just absolutely
absolutely uh reset the game.
>> Let the challenge
begin.
and certainly for black filmmakers and
black artists. Um, he was able to infuse
so much culture into the Marvel universe
and most studios
shy away from that because they feel
like culture specificity pushes people
away, but it actually pulls them in. It
draws you in and it makes these stories
feel fresh. And Ryan just puts so much
of our culture in such a beautiful way
on such a beautiful big canvas at the
same time telling a story where we care
deeply about both the hero and the
villain. Like my two sons, you know,
they love Killilmonger and uh and I
could understand why. But to see my sons
walk out of a theater uh I think they
were 12 and 15 at the time like with
their chest out and their shoulders
back. I mean that's an amazing thing for
them to be able to see themselves
reflected like that. Yeah. He just took
Marvel and twisted it and made it into
something I'm absolutely worthy of
praise.
>> Just buried me in the ocean with my
ancestors that jumped from the ships
cuz they knew death was better than
bondage. a line like that in a Marvel
film. It was ridiculous and the power of
that and uh again to see the emotion not
only for my husband and I who could
fully understand that statement but my
sons as well.
>> I wanted to bring up that the highest
ranking version I think of of this thing
you're talking about where it's like an
aur blockbuster type of movie is Mad Max
Fury Road. You wrote a book on this
movie. I could not believe the passion
that this movie elicited when I talked
to people in the industry about it. So,
what do you think it was about this
particular action movie that made people
feel so strongly about it?
>> I just don't think there's any action
movie like it and I don't think there
ever will be again. You know, I think
that's a that's a particularly
interesting thing to note because that
movie was the product of a singular
visionary that directed George Miller,
but also the way it was made where it
was shot on location with real car
crashes. Yes, there were special effects
aiding everything, but the amount of
doing it for real is is something you
simply do not get at this scale and will
not get at this scale, I think, ever
again. almost everything is shot on
green screen or you know in in in much
more studio managed environments.
Whereas for as fantastical as MadMax
Fury Road is when you see somebody fall
off a car or a car flips over you think
wow I just watched people die. Totally
totally
>> it is visceral in a way that almost
nothing is anymore. most every uh
superhero temple or action temple we
watch right now I'm not feeling very
much because I think that car was
computerenerated and I'm just watching
two people slug each other who aren't
feeling anything and do not bleed
whereas Mad Max Fury Road I felt
everything and continue to even after
having written a book about it I could
watch that and still be transported
>> amazing you're making me want to go
watch it right now
>> good that was my whole mission doing
this podcast to success.
>> It's just the most imaginative thing
that you've ever seen. The world
building of it, the philosophy of it,
and then it's just like every piece of
writing in it is just perfect and every
uh camera movement is perfect. Like
everything about it is just like
completely perfect. Like I think we all
feel like we're all on Fury Road and I
think every day we feel deeper and
deeper into Fury Road. We're about to
we're turning our world into a desert,
right? I mean, I just don't trust
anybody who says they don't like that
movie or they don't think it's very
good. I'm I'm like, "Do you like
movies?" I'm like, if someone says they
don't like they're like, "Oh, I don't I
don't really get Fury Road." I'm like,
"Oh, you don't like movies? It's not why
you it's not you don't like it." Okay.
Obviously, Black Panther and Fury Road
are these huge action blockbusters, but
those are not the norm on this list, as
we've said, and I think people who see
that might say, "Well, sure, Hollywood
Insiders made this list. They're kind of
the elite. It's not surprising they
didn't choose, you know, superhero
movies." What would you say to that?
>> Well, what I found very surprising is
that ultimately we put together a
separate poll. Uh that poll was drawn
from the reader ballots when people were
given the ability to craft their own
ballot. Eventually those ballots got
tabulated into their own master list of
over 200,000 ballots from the readers.
Wow. So something that you would
>> Yeah. Something that you would think
would be maybe, you know, more populist
or reflect different sensibilities. And
we did see some differences. But what I
was struck by is that a lot of those
so-called highbrow films that are in the
Hollywood top 10, we also found in the
reader top 10. In fact, you know, we had
rolled out the ability to to cast your
own ballot long before we'd revealed the
top 20 movies on the Hollywood list,
which we did in in batches of 20 every
day. And even, you know, Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday of that week, as
people were casting their ballots, I was
so struck to see both Parasite and
Mhalland Drive leading the reader ballot
poll. Um, and many of those same films
like No Country for Old Men, There Will
Be Blood, The Social Network, also in
the top 10 for the readers. Yes. Uh,
there are, you know, there is a more of
a willingness to embrace action movies
and genre fair. You've got both Dune
movies on the reader list. You have all
three Lord of the Rings movies, but not
many more superhero movies, although you
do see Avengers Endgame in the number
100 slot on the reader list.
>> What were some of the other similarities
you noticed between the two lists?
>> Well, again, you might expect a reader
list to reflect, you know, the current
trends, which, you know, it's it's,
let's be real, the streaming landscape
uh has upended almost everything about
our culture. But at the same time, there
were no streaming movies in the top 100
of the readers list.
>> Wow. And in and in the Hollywood list,
>> only one on the Hollywood list, Roma by
Alfonso Coron, who was one of the most
represented filmmakers on the Hollywood
list. But I think for the readers to not
be choosing streaming movies may be an
indication of how little they're really
watching those movies when they watch
them. You know, you can fire up
something on streaming and be on your
phone. You can be live tweeting it. You
can be checking your Instagram. You can
be doing laundry and folding it as
something plays out in the background.
You know, certainly a lot of television
shows, a lot of streaming TV shows with
the filler they've got have trained
people to maybe only half watch at
times. And I don't think that's the
experience that people are going to
remember uh when they're thinking about
their favorite movies of the last 25
years. Like I said, you know, that
theatrical experience can put such an
impressive thumbrint on your memory of
the movie. And I'm not sure that
streaming can replicate that.
>> But it's so interesting because this is
something that came up a lot in the
conversations that I had with, you know,
the filmmakers and the actors and the
writers is that pretty much all of them
said that their favorite movies were
ones they had seen on the big screen.
And obviously these are people that
literally do this for a living. But I
too, you know, remember where I was when
I saw, you know, some of my favorite
movies physically. Like I could tell you
what row I was in. And I I just wonder
if there's something about that, the
physical experience, the communal
experience that makes it different
substantively.
>> Well, can I answer your question with
the question, Natalie?
>> Oh, I Yes, you may. If you had to put a
movie that would be your no-brainer pick
on your own ballot of 10, what do you
remember about the experience of
watching that movie?
>> Okay, this I'm so glad you asked because
you're giving there's this was not on
the list, but Uncut Gems is the one I
would put on there.
>> Uncut Gems number 58 on our list was not
nominated for any Oscars, but made that
list over many other films that won
Oscars that year. I saw that movie in
the second row of the theater and it was
such an intense propulsive movie that
being where I was in the theater made it
feel like I was like in a car that had
no brakes and I was speeding down the
highway. It was just overwhelming as an
experience. My friend told me she has a
picture of me. she saw it with me in the
movie just to speak to the communal part
of this at the very end of it with my
hands like over my face just kind of
like grabbing my my face because it was
you it was palpable the energy of it
>> and I think that energy is what you
remember right you know that wouldn't be
the same if you watched it on streaming
you'd still think that was a great movie
but there is just something about that
time signature experience of seeing that
in a in a theater and this list is a
real tribute to that.
>> You would go into the theater and forget
yourself.
>> The lights go down. You're with people.
>> You would become part of the movie. You
would be scared for the people in the
movie or you would laugh with people in
the movie.
>> I feel like seeing a movie in the
theater, there's nothing like it because
it's a it's a communal experience. It's
the shared experience
of people you don't even know, but we're
all laughing at the same time. We're all
crying at the same time. We're all
feeling. We're all lifted. We're all
scared. Um, it's an incredible thing.
Not only to be an audience within that,
but to be a filmmaker and the puppeteer
of that.
>> When you're with other people and you
have the same feeling at the same time,
that's really exciting. Where else do
you get to have a sound blasting like
that, right? Or have an image that big
in front of you. It's a magical place
because of that.
>> Okay, so I don't mean to rain on our
parade of loving the theaters right now.
But I don't think that the fundamental
dynamics of this industry are really
going to shift because of this list or
anything else, right? I mean, streamers
are still going to be dominant. movies
are still going to be competing with
these short little bursts of video on
our phone. I mean, it does make you kind
of wonder like in in 25 years, we're not
going to be listing the best 100 Tik
Toks of the 21st century.
>> I mean, I'd watch them. It would be
quick. Um, but you know, at the same
time, uh, things do move at the speed of
light. Will Tik Tok even be around, uh,
in 10 years for as dominant as it is
now? It's hard to tell. But I do
guarantee you that movies will be
they've been around for as long as they
have. The process of watching them may
continue to change. You know, the way we
the movie industry has changed over the
last 10 years has been dizzying, but
movies will be around. And when you have
that really wonderful specific
experience with a movie where you feel
like a movie gets you and you get a
movie in a way that is surprising and
maybe even reveals something about
yourself. Well, who'd pass that
experience up? Kyle, this has been a lot
of fun. Thank you so much for coming on.
>> I'm glad that I could bring a little bit
of fun to the daily.
[Music]